Flask is one of the most important Python web frameworks and it powers a bunch of the internet.
David Lord, Flask's lead maintainer, is here to give us an update on the state of Flask and
palettes in 2024. If you care about Flask and where it is and where it's going, you'll definitely
want to listen in. This is Talk Python to Me, episode 472, recorded July 9th, 2024.
Are you ready for your host, Darius? You're listening to Michael Kennedy on Talk Python to Me.
Live from Portland, Oregon, and this segment was made with Python.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python. This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm @mkennedy, and follow the podcast using @talkpython,
both accounts over at fostodon.org. And keep up with the show and listen to over nine years of
episodes at talkpython.fm. If you want to be part of our live episodes, you can find the live
streams over on YouTube. Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube and get
notified about upcoming shows. This episode is sponsored by Sentry. Don't let those errors go
unnoticed. Use Sentry. Get started at talkpython.fm/sentry. And it's also brought to you by
us over at Talk Python Training. Did you know that we have over 250 hours of Python courses?
Yeah, that's right. Check them out at talkpython.fm/courses. Before we jump into the
interview, I want to let you know that we still have some spots left in my Code in a Castle event.
If you're looking to learn some of the premier frameworks and techniques in Python,
and you'd like to have a bucket list type of experience while doing so, then check out
talkpython.fm/castle. In October, I'll be running a six-day Python course for an intimate audience
in a villa in Tuscany. Half the time we'll be learning Python, and the other half will be
exploring the best of what Italy has to offer. Check out the course outline, the excursions,
and all the details at talkpython.fm/castle. Or if you'd like to just shoot me an email,
michael@talkpython.fm, or find me on the socials, and I'm happy to talk about it.
I hope to see you there. David, welcome back to Talk Python To Me. Great to have you here.
Yeah, hello.
Going to be super fun to talk about Flask and more broadly, Palettes, just all the different
projects around Flask and tools and variations like Court and so on. You give a really nice talk
at Embedded FlaskCon, talk a bit about that in a second, about the state of Palettes. I thought,
"You know what? Let's just take that idea and share it with everyone." Looking forward to
talking about that.
Yeah, there's been a lot going on.
I bet there has. I bet there has. I can't remember exactly when you were on. I think it's about 100
episodes ago, which puts that at a couple of years. What have you been up to the last couple of years?
Just more Flask. It's all Flask all the time.
Seems like such a simple API, but you can work on it forever, right?
I've acquired a few more libraries, so I've written more libraries and stuff as well.
But still same job. Well, I guess I got a house. I got married.
Okay. Congratulations, two times. That's awesome.
So a little bit of life changes.
Life keeps marching on. It's amazing. Flask is certainly one of the most popular web frameworks.
I guess we could start with giving people a sense of the popularity, but my thought is just like,
"Wow, the pressure of working on something that affects so many folks." Have you pushed out a
change?
Yeah. I've had a weird thought before that I try not to think about the numbers too often,
because it's like 100 million or more if you add up all the different libraries and stuff a month.
I've had a thought before, if I push out something that doesn't work for enough people,
that probably has some very minor but noticeable effect on the tech sector for that day or hour,
which is scary.
Yeah. It's not quite an AWS US-1 East downtime, but it's also not that.
Yeah. I think definitely since I've started, a lot more people have become aware of better
practices around pinning their dependencies, that sort of thing. In part because we did make some
deprecations and then breaking changes in Flask and the other libraries, and people came to our
issue tracker saying, "Oh, you broke something." And ultimately, I had to tell them, "You need to
be using a tool. There's quite a few tools out now, although we don't have a lockfile standard
yet, but there's pip compile, there's PDM, there's Rai. You need to use a tool and pin your
dependency tree, because then you can see when there's updates, and you can update them deliberately
and test and adapt to those changes." I was giving that message a lot in the beginning, and over the
past five years or so, I've definitely had to post it less often. I feel like more people are
like aware of those tools and practices now. I would also add that the tooling has gotten a lot
better at that. It used to be, "Okay, so what you're going to do is you're going to write a
requirements.txt file, and then you set your versions explicitly." And that, for many people,
only addressed the primary dependencies, not the transitive dependency. They might pin Flask,
but did they pin Werkzeug? I don't know. They may have, probably they didn't, unless they use pip
freeze, but then you gather a bunch of garbage that isn't actually about your project that got
sucked in from some other thing. It was really sort of funky before. I don't know, you mentioned
pip tools and pip compile. I am loving that workflow these days.
Yeah, that's what I've switched all the projects themselves to. If you go look at Flask or Werkzeug
or any of those, we have a requirements folder with different environment files that say, "Here
are our direct dependencies," and then we compile those into fully locked dependencies. All our
tests run off of those. Our build and publish workflow runs off of those. It's not quite the
same because those are our development dependencies instead of our runtime dependencies, but it's still
really helpful just to know that if we don't do anything, our process will continue to work
because it worked last time. If we have contributors at sprints, now it's much easier.
I had a problem the first few sprints I was running where every developer would try to set
up their own machine and get different versions of things or have different versions.
Point in time snapshots, just whenever they got started, right?
Yeah, so now they all install the exact same list of dependencies,
so everybody's development environment looks exactly the same, which is a lot more usable.
Yeah, that's excellent. I have the same workflow. I have a top level dependencies that I actually
would consider my dependencies, and then I pip compile, and then unpin, and I pip compile those
to a pin dependencies, and I just do the upgrade when I feel like, "Oh, let's go get some new
dependencies and see how that goes." Yeah, yeah, very nice. Okay, well, let's start with FlaskCon.
I called it an embedded conference, and this is different than it has been before. I think FlaskCon
at one point was a purely online one, or maybe that was just COVID, and we just didn't have
the timing or memory. Yeah, so it was timing, really. Years ago, right before COVID started,
or quarantine started, I had been working myself up to do an in-person conference. It's something
I've wanted to do for a while because I love attending conferences. I love the community
around it. DjangoCon happened in San Diego a few times, and that was really fun. I just crashed it.
It's the Flask person, the San Diego Flask person. I was getting ready to do that, and then
COVID happened, but some other members of the community, the Palettes team, stepped up and said,
"Hey, we can do an online one." Running a conference, even online, is very hard. There's
a lot of stuff to keep track of. Oh, yeah. We ran three online conferences, I think 2020, 2021,
and 2023. I think we skipped one, but those are all on pyvideo.org if you want to find them.
Now FlaskCon 2024 is there also. I finally got the opportunity with PyCon. They previously had
this hatchery program where you could propose, "I want to do this event," and the hatchery program
will say, "That sounds great. We'll handle the venue, the food, the insurance, the legal stuff.
You get one of our rooms, and you can do whatever you want in it or whatever you propose in it."
Last year at PyCon, I talked to some of the organizers, and they suggested, "Hey,
the hatchery is coming back. This would be a great way to do it so that you don't have to
learn everything at once. You can practice." We managed to do some advertising. It's hard to
advertise new conferences in general, and then especially now that a lot of the Python community
is not on Twitter anymore, I'm not, and even if they were, everything is fragmented more.
So it was hard to get the reach and get enough CFP proposals, but we did get a few and ended up
accepting two people from the community that gave just wonderful talks.
I saw one on doing PWAs. What was the other one on?
Was it progressive monomers? No, there was one on-
Single page, sorry.
And there was one on observability, and then PWAs or single page apps, and the extension
ecosystem and the idea around defining Flask plugins. Then there was my talk, which was just
the subject of this podcast.
Welcome, people.
So will it maybe be at PyCon next year, or are you going to branch out?
I don't know yet. I think they would accept me back, but I wouldn't want to... I kind of
view the hat tree... I don't know if this is true, but I kind of view the hat tree as like,
"We're going to help you get started, but not keep coming back for the same thing."
But I don't want to take it...
Right, right, right. I'm a 10-year rookie. You're not a rookie anymore. Get out here with the...
I would still love to run a conference, somewhat selfishly, so that I can run one in San Diego or
on the West Coast at least.
That's what I was going to say. How about San Diego? Then we can all come down there and stay
by the beach.
Yeah, I mentioned DjangoCon before, but they stayed in San Diego for three years straight
at this little hotel that was really nice, had a pool. People just kind of congregated,
and it was like a 15-minute drive for me. So yeah, next year at PyCon, I might not be there.
We're expecting our daughter to be born in January next year.
Congratulations. And that might take precedence over PyCon?
I'm going to have a lot less time in general, which will come up in other things we're going
to talk about. But yeah, I probably, for the first time since 2016 or 2015, I will not go to PyCon,
probably. But there was a conference, right? This was the last conference I went to before
quarantine. Two weeks before quarantine hit, I went up to Los Angeles for PyBeach, which was this
very, very small first-time conference. I just love those little ones. And I met the organizer
Nick Kentar at North Bay Python a few times now, and I've told him, "We should try to bring that
back." I think there's a few other people who are interested as well. It doesn't have to be FlaskCon
specifically, but if I could run some sort of local conference and I could do some Flask stuff
or attract some Flask stuff. Well, I'm pretty excited that PyCon is going to be in Long Beach
year after next. Yeah, two years from now, that'll be really nice as well.
So that'll be really nice. But maybe you can drum up a bunch of interests and connect with
a lot of people who are conference goers of that place, but encourage them to sign up for a list
and get notified about whatever this other thing is. Because it'll be in the same basic neighborhood.
Yeah. So Jazzy out in the audience asked, "Can we attend FlaskCon online?"
This year, or this in-person one in 2024, we weren't able to do that. But all the talks are
available now on our YouTube channel. If you just search FlaskCon 2024, you'll find it. Or
pyvideo.org has all of them listed. The first three we ran were purely online. So you could
watch them streaming. This year, we just didn't have the infrastructure for it. So we couldn't
really manage to do a live stream and the recordings at the same time. I was lucky enough
to get Elaine Wong's help doing the recordings. And she brought all her cool specialized equipment.
So we were able to get the recordings up really fast, at least.
Yeah, that's really good. Are the ones for PyCon even up yet? I don't think they are.
Not that I'm aware of.
Maybe they're going really slowly. But yeah, it was really nice. We just recorded this hard drive
and she was like, "Oh, you guys timed all your starts and stops really well." So all I have to
do is do these simple cuts and it's all up. Just trim the edges and upload. Perfect.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's really cool. So yeah, I'll link to the playlist of FlaskCon 2024 for folks in the
show notes. They can check that out. Awesome. Well, we'll see what 2025 brings. Hopefully,
some more good conference. So let's-
Yeah, we might have other team members besides me attending PyCon as well. So we'll see what
happens.
Sure.
If nothing else, I usually just run out of space or something. So there's always something going on.
Yeah, for sure. Now, I want to talk about the state of palettes in 2024. But surely there are
quite a few people out there who listen who are really new to Python and programming. You'd be
surprised. A lot of people say they use it like this podcast, like language immersion. Like you
want to learn Portuguese, you move to Brazil, you want to learn Python, you just put it on your
earbuds and listen until it makes sense. So especially for those folks, what is palettes?
Palettes is an open source organization. So we're not a company, but we do have a team of
volunteer open source maintainers who volunteer their free time to work on Flask and the libraries
that make up Flask.
This portion of Talk Python to Me is brought to you by Sentry. Code breaks, it's a fact of life.
With Sentry, you can fix it faster. As I've told you all before, we use Sentry on many of our apps
and APIs here at Talk Python. I recently used Sentry to help me track down one of the weirdest
bugs I've run into in a long time. Here's what happened. When signing up for our mailing list,
it would crash under a non-common execution path, like situations where someone was already
subscribed or entered an invalid email address or something like this. The bizarre part was that our
logging of that unusual condition itself was crashing. How is it possible for her log to crash?
It's basically a glorified print statement. Well, Sentry to the rescue. I'm looking at the crash
report right now, and I see way more information than you'd expect to find in any log statement.
And because it's production, debuggers are out of the question. I see the traceback, of course,
but also the browser version, client OS, server OS, server OS version, whether it's production
or Q&A, the email and name of the person signing up, that's the person who actually experienced
the crash, dictionaries of data on the call stack, and so much more. What was the problem?
I initialized the logger with the string info for the level rather than the enumeration dot info,
which was an integer-based enum. So the logging statement would crash, saying that I could not
use less than or equal to between strings and ints. Crazy town. But with Sentry, I captured it,
fixed it, and I even helped the user who experienced that crash. Don't fly blind. Fix
code faster with Sentry. Create your Sentry account now at talkpython.fm/sentry. And if you
sign up with the code TALKPYTHON, all capital, no spaces, it's good for two free months of Sentry's
business plan, which will give you up to 20 times as many monthly events as well as other features.
That was kind of its purpose when it was created was, hey, Flask has these set of libraries,
Armin, the original author of them, was not as involved in them anymore. And like the community,
he wanted the community to be more involved in them. So he created this organization. This was
right around when I was becoming maintainer, too, eight years ago. And so it's kind of the
organization that holds those projects and like the team that kind of maintains and sets policies
and that sort of thing. So Flask is like the most popular library that everybody heard of,
followed by Jinja and Click. But then we also have Werkzeug, which is the lower level stuff
below Flask, and then MarkupSafe and It's Dangerous are two little helper libraries
for those things. And then now we've also got Quart, which is the async version of Flask.
That's an official Palettes project now, even though it started as just kind of a separate
thing made by Flask. Yeah, it was an outside thing that
Philip Jones worked on, and now it's coming closer and closer to being official.
Yeah. And like we're doing a lot of work on that to kind of try to unify Flask and Quart as much
as possible. So behind the scenes, they're sharing a lot more code now. Quart, like Werkzeug,
is all like the low level request response handling for the Flask users. And Quart wasn't
using that at first because it needed like much more async things. But we've managed to
develop a lot more things called, the term is called SansIO, like without input/output,
where we have all like the behavior that's common to both. It doesn't require asyncIO versus
sync processes shared between Quart and Flask. And eventually we're slowly moving in that
direction. The idea is that at some point you will not pip install Quart or import Quart anymore.
You'll just pip install Flask and then do like from Flask import Quart instead.
Oh, interesting.
Library as well. Once we get to like a point that we're really comfortable with.
See, you're shipping one thing.
Yeah.
Will you be able to use the same app? You want to say @appget or will that be a...
Yeah. That's the one thing.
App F equals Flask and app Q equals Quart?
Yeah. You'll still have one single app, but you're going to have to pick ahead of time.
We've tried to think of ways around this, but just the way that Flask is constructed
means that so much of it is customizable by extensions. And those hook APIs that extensions
can customize, all the extensions out there expect that they're sync, they're def whatever,
not async def. And maybe we'll figure out something, but so far we can't figure out a way
to unify that into a single object. So you're going to have to still pick, I want to be async
first or sync first. And...
Yeah.
Yeah. But at least it'll be in one place. You're not going to have to decide,
"Oh, I need to know about Quart." You can just look at the Flask docs and see, "Oh,
I'm going to be doing mostly web requests or video processing or something that's I/O
intensive. I should pick Quart or I'm just doing the basic API that everybody makes for their
data science project. I just need Flask." Hopefully it makes it a little easier.
Yeah. Yeah. Really interesting. Question out in the audience. It sounds like it'll work both
WWSGI, WSGI and ASGI. Any future where it just goes all async? Not likely in the short term,
it sounds like, right?
Yeah. Flask will always be WSGI because it's so tied to how sync processes work. ASGI has
an ability to... And so if you use Hypercorn, which is a popular ASGI server, which is also
by Phil from Quart, you can run a WSGI application as an ASGI application. You don't necessarily get
all the benefits of ASGI, but you can at least run it with that. And in a similar vein, if you're
using Quart, you can write both sync and async things and they all just work together. And with
Flask, you can write async stuff in Flask right now. You just don't get the benefits of ASGI's
connection pooling. So you're still doing one worker per request response, but you can in that
worker kick off async code.
Right. Okay.
Interesting. Yeah. I've done stuff for like a FastAPI. I've written a decorator that it decorates
both sync and async methods. And it's pretty tricky. There's just basically...
Yeah.
It has two wrappers. It goes, "All right. Well, which are you? We're going to actually apply
that one too." It's tricky to juggle. And then all the plugins, it's got to be a gnarly combination.
Yeah. Basically, we're just taking it in baby steps and we're hoping as we keep unifying their
shared code more and more, we can start discovering good patterns for writing an extension that works
in both, for example, and documenting those and maybe helping some extensions that are popular
update to that.
Yeah.
So it's a slow process, but it's surmountable.
Yeah. Maybe you get to a point where they're close enough. You're like, "Oh, now it's really
obvious how these things unify. At the beginning, it wasn't right." Okay. So what's the state?
How are things?
What's the state?
Maybe you start with the big boy flask. And inbox zero is one of the biggest takeaways I've heard.
Inbox zero. That was... It was actually... That wasn't 2024. That was a 2021 or 22, I think.
Still look at that.
Look at that.
Yeah. We don't have true zero most of the time, although I do get down to it every now and then.
But I did hit inbox zero. So when I first started maintaining all these libraries,
I think combined, there was probably over a thousand open issues and PRs.
And that's a nightmare if you know all the code. If you were the author, but I was not the author
of this code. So I was both unfamiliar with the internals of all these libraries and had to keep
track of all these issues. So I was learning libraries, learning how to be a maintainer,
and trying to keep track of all these requests going back and forth and computing PRs and all
that sort of stuff. So early on, it was a goal I identified of, "I just need to make this manageable."
And once I got there, it's become a lot easier. Once you're at inbox zero,
it's a lot easier to keep it hovering around there.
It is. I'm really feeling... I'm feeling rough about my true inbox. I'm looking at five or
six persistent emails. I really got to get back to you, but it's a whole different deal than if
it's 10,000. Did you declare any sort of bankruptcy equivalent of inbox bank, where you just go like,
"Archive a good... If it's two years or older, I'm just going to archive it and it'll come back
if it matters." Or did you literally go through every one and deal with it?
I did go through every one individually. I didn't just blanket say, "Everything older than two years
is closed." But I did treat things as... I don't like stale bots. So we don't run a stale bot.
Yeah, I don't like those either.
Yeah.
I don't object to things being closed as the resolution versus fixed, but I want somebody to
be making that decision and put a reason behind it. So yeah, I tried going through every single
issue. Basically, my workflow is just every single day, pick an issue, work on it. Pick another one,
okay, spend a couple hours, wait until the next day. And yeah, just had to keep making calls on
them.
Yeah. You're like, "All right, two come in a day. I'm going to do 20 a day until
I catch up." Or something like that, right?
There was a lot of stuff also where it had just been sitting open for years and nobody had
really commented on it besides... Or maybe the most people had commented on it was saying, "Me
too." But they hadn't actually moved the discussion forward. And it would be nice if open source,
if more people contribute. I don't blame anybody for not contributing or being a contributor,
but I would love to attract more long-term contributors and stuff. But that's the way
it starts is you need to help people make calls on stuff, evaluate things, right?
So instead of saying, "Me too," start looking into it and saying, "Okay, me too. And okay,
here's all the issues that might come up when we do this." Or, "I looked at the code base and
we could do it this way."
Right, exactly.
People weren't doing that.
I also want it, but I want it and I think here's a path forward or here's a prototype.
Yeah. They have to advance the conversation. And that wasn't happening in a lot of the old
issues. So I did kind of... I didn't outright just close old issues, but I did say, "Okay,
this thing is old and it hasn't seen any movement." There's a lot of things also where it's like,
yeah, it's a reasonable request, but is it necessary for Flask? Does it belong in Flask
or in extension? This is something I'm trying to figure out. I want to be writing documentation
for other maintainers on the team so they understand how I did this sort of stuff.
This is the trickiest problem. I don't know how I'm going to document yet, but I got a sense over
time of just being able to really quickly make a call of yes or no on things. I can look at an
issue and say, "Okay, no, this doesn't belong in for X, Y, Z or something." Because Flask,
like all the libraries in Palettes have very focused core goal of them. And they try to be
extensible to some degree. So a lot of the things you can do by picking extension. So really what I
try to look for is I need this thing in Flask because it is literally not possible to write
an extension to do this without being able to hook into it this way or something like that.
Oh, that makes sense. Sure. Part of the Zen of Flask is that it's minimal. And then you build
around it. You pick your database, you pick your whatever, and then go from there. Yeah.
Yeah. Cool. All right. Well, three open issues is incredible. As in 67,000 stars,
that's also pretty incredible. Let's see. So you joined each one of these different ones. You
gave a sense of how many downloads. So for Flask, maybe these numbers change, but I think it hasn't
been but a couple of months. It's around 75 million downloads a month. That's a hefty chunk of user
base there. Yeah. I occasionally look at pypistats.org or pepi.tech are the two websites that
track these numbers. So I can look at the current one. Flask is downloads in the last day, 3.15
million downloads in the last month, 66 million. OK. It's not what people are telling. Yeah. Look
at that. Look at that. Yeah. Yeah. And there's like sometimes there's like random. You can see
in this graph here, like there's just random times where it just suddenly drops by like a
couple of hundred thousand or right or rises. Yeah. Like if you look at the left half of this
graph, it's higher. But like I think that's just because like big services like come in and out
of existence or like do an upgrade or whatever. So there are some very big systems out there that
are just downloading, doing a ton of downloads. Yeah, it's pretty wild. You'll probably also spot
some PyPI outages. Well, I imagine that got nothing to do. And like they also change the
way they report over time, like pip and stuff change how they report statistics. So I usually
just look at like the overall numbers. Pretty consistent. Yeah. Try not to look at it too
often. Like I said at the beginning, like it's a it's a big number to know that like this many
people are about to download any change you make. Yeah. And when I think about these kinds of
numbers, it's not just if you make a change to Flask, then it affects this many people. But
these are themselves applications using this, each of which has many, many, many users potentially.
So there's a multiplier on top of this, right? Yeah. And yeah, that's been that's been
difficult. That's one of the other state of Flask. That's the other half of the state of Flask. It's
like we've been making a lot of progress, but like this amount of responsibility rests pretty heavily
on it. It's like it can be pretty stressful. And you did mention a baby and being potentially tired
in the future and stuff like that as well. Yeah, absolutely. But like combined, you know,
these numbers combined with the thought that anything I do could break a bunch of people and
get them to complain at me or people will complain to me even if I don't break a ton of people. And
just kind of like the ever present notion of we are not at inbox zero on some of the projects
and stuff. So there is still a lot of open stuff. It's. Yeah, it's a lot of stress for me. And it's
been I've like suffered burnout a few times from her year for the last four years or so.
Oh, man, that's rough. Are you getting some support from the other people at the org and
potentially from the outside? Yeah, I I there is there are other people on the team. So it's not
like we're a bus factor of one in the sense of like if I was not here for some reason,
other people would have access to these things and could keep them going. But the reality is
not to downplay all the work that they do in the community and when they they are working on code.
But like I do probably 90 percent of the code and like the decision making and all that sort of
stuff. So it would definitely be a very different project if I wasn't around. It would at minimum
be a scramble. Right. Like when Guido stepped down, like, wait a minute. Yeah. What now? Yeah.
So like I so this is what I've been like trying to work for a long time because I've kind of
always recognized that I've been kind of the not limiting factor, but like I'm like the point of
failure in this thing. And so I've been trying to grow the team and trying to make our processes
more automated, you know, try. And then now what I'm trying to do is because I know I have this
hard deadline in January when I'm going to have less time is I'm trying to document how to do
what I've learned to do, like how to be a maintainer is something we don't really have a
lot of. It feels like is we have we have a contributing guide, right? Or we have user
documentation or a developer guide, like how to use Flask, but we don't have a how to maintain
Flask documentation. Yeah. It's kind of missing from the community in general. Yeah. I presume
that'd be out in public. People interested could check it out whenever that gets written. Oh,
yeah. It's not like a private it's not going to be a private thing, but yeah, of course it's not.
It's not ready yet, but it's something I'm actively working on this, like identifying,
like all the stuff I've accumulated in my head and what I've learned how to do or decisions I've
made or like services we use, like just the fact that, oh, you know, we're part of the PSF.
This is how you contact the PSF. Yeah. It's not written down. Yeah, exactly. Or like that we're
part of Tidelift and, you know, these other donation sources. Yeah. Also, like stuff like
how do I make a decision on whether to keep something closed or open or when is it time to
make a new release or what is our version policy or our support policy or our security policy? Like
a lot of these things are under documented right now if they're documented at all. And so that's
kind of my goal for the rest of this year is to like make palettes more sustainable, regardless of
how much availability I have. Maybe a little more systematized, maybe a little bit. Yeah. So before
we move off of PyPI stats, Gusra has an interesting meta question. Is PyPI stats built on Flask
itself? Do you have any idea? I have no idea. I know they're open source. Oh yeah. Okay. So maybe
you could tell. I was going to say there's not like a header or something that Flask sends. So
yeah. I can't find it. Yeah. We don't know. It is open source. Oh, here we go. Here we go.
Have we got a requirement? We've got pyproject.toml. Oh yeah. It's Flask.
There you have it. I love that. There we go. Beautiful. It's very rewarding every time I find
out a new place that like just decided to use Flask and has been using it and it's just completely
behind the scenes and you can't tell like nothing's like it's all just working. Yeah. But I love going
to like conferences for that reason too. Cause so many people come up to me and like say like,
oh yeah, we use Flask to like run the Mars Rover or somebody, one of the people giving a talk
at FlaskCon was like, my company writes the like energy management software for this conference
center and it's in Flask. It's very fun to learn all those new uses. Have you ever gotten onto the
JPL? I know it's like a blower's drive. That'd be fun, right? To go out there and actually see the
Flask. I would see it. This is what runs in the Rover and the helicopter. Awesome. All right. So
that's Flask. What one do you want to talk about next? Next on my tab list, I got Jinja,
we can go wherever you want. So maybe that a good foundation? Yeah, we did like Flask and
Vericsoig are pretty tied because most of the stuff that people report to Flask is actually
an issue with one of the other libraries that Flask is using. And most often that's with Vericsoig.
So you can see we're not at inbox zero, we're at inbox nine right now. That's incredible. You know,
maybe like I asked you to explain palettes like Vericsoig, you know, that's probably not how
English speaking folks would say that. Werkzeug or Werkzug or something. Right. But Armen,
I don't know if you're the creator of this, is German or Austrian but speaks German. And so
that's the German pronunciation. And hence, that's why we're saying it that way. Right?
That's my best approximation. I'm sure I'm doing it wrong also.
Pretty close.
Yeah. It literally is like, it means like work thing, which is like tool.
Yeah. Yeah. Basically tool. Yeah. It's like tools like work, your carpentry tools or yes,
handyman tools type thing. Yeah.
Yeah. But this was written before Flask existed. And I think it was written more when like WSGI
was becoming a spec or had just become a spec because it is just a bunch of utilities for
doing HTTP header parsing, doing all the low level WSGI environment management,
wrapping that information in request and response objects. So you can kind of work with them a
little easier. So it's all like the underlying tools that you need to build Flask. There's also
like the whole routing system, you know, so you can in Flask, you just do at app dot route. But
behind the scenes, what that's doing is it's adding it to a route map that Werkzeug defines.
And that defines like, here's how we actually like collect that and like turn it into a bunch
of rules that we can match URLs against. And there's other things in there as well. The
reloader, the debugger, the dev server. Yeah. So one of the updates you gave on
Werkzeug is a performance improvement by way of getting rid of the stir bytes duopoly.
Yeah. I've been doing a lot in Werkzeug. So that one and the URL lib one that we'll talk about
were two big things. But basically like this library, like I just described it,
it's like just a huge collection of tools and little utility functions.
And there's a history there because when all these libraries first started, Python 3 didn't
exist or barely existed. And so everything was written originally for Python 2 where
strings and bytes worked a lot differently. It was one of the primary break-in changes.
There were other changes, but that was the long, the one that people really had a long live
bug tracking. If it's different syntax, you just change the syntax, but if it's
subtle behavior changes, then trouble looms.
Yeah. And so, yeah, in Python 2, it was much easier to like, well not, yeah, it was easier
to treat like incoming data as bytes, but like treat it as a string. There wasn't like as big
a distinction between strings and bytes, which was convenient in some ways, especially for like
low level tools like HTTP, where you just work in ASCII bytes.
Say if you like ASCII, it's probably fine. If you don't like ASCII, you might not like it so much.
Yeah. But it also like caused, like, I first learned Python 3, so I like, I don't have a
difference on this, but I like Python 3's distinction. I think it's much better to
have that distinction.
Yeah. You and me both.
Strings and bytes. But at the time, like when it was first happening, it wasn't as clear cut.
Like, oh yeah, this is better or this is easier because you had to support both. And so when
Python 3 came out and started getting like more momentum, all these libraries tacked on
support for both Python 2 and Python 3, which among other things meant that you had to
now check for like whether you were getting strings or bytes everywhere. Because you might
be in Python 2 land where you're getting bytes, or you might be in Python 3 land where you're
getting strings and need to like do other conversions. There, so it was especially bad
because it's a collection of like kind of independent utility functions. Some functions
build on each other, but every function could potentially be imported and used for its own
little piece of functionality. And so every single function needed to check all its arguments
for like my string or bytes. Even if most of the time, especially nowadays, people aren't
using Verixoic directly and all these tools. They're using Flask, which just does the right
thing from the get-go, which means all those intermediate checks on the way are totally
unnecessary. Because you already knew from like the first function that started calling.
Right.
It's already handled.
Testing 10 times for the same thing down the process.
Right. And this was just pervasive throughout. Verixoic was just everywhere with all these
unnecessary checks. And it made the code more complex to maintain, reason about,
made the execution slower. There's kind of another thing going on at the same time, which is like
we had, because we could support, like because we were working with bytes in a lot of places,
there was also like a lot more support for, well, maybe the data is encoded in this encoding or this
one. But nowadays everybody, like I looked at, before I made this decision, I looked at stats.
Everybody, 99.5% of people, web applications on the web right now are using UTF-8. So they're
never dealing with their encodings. And UTF-8 can encode everything.
Yeah.
And so like Verixoic was doing all these things about letting you pass encodings all over the
place and switch between things. And that was also complexity. So I finally decided, okay,
I had heard some anecdotes as well from people who had switched from using Python 2 to Python 3,
or had stuck with Python 2 and old versions of Verixoic because they had noticed a significant
performance difference in the first versions of Verixoic that added that 2 and 3 compatibility.
And so I figured, okay, I'm going to get a similar speed up if I remove that now,
now that we don't support Python 2 at all. That was very complicated. I basically just had to
go through every single function and start removing it, run all the tests, see what failed,
pick another function to keep working on and just slowly, slowly pull it all apart.
But I did end up with, so now Verixoic just supports strings everywhere, except in the
very few places where it works directly with the request and response data where it handles bytes.
Like multi-part form file.
Yeah. When you first get the request in and it's just the raw body that you might turn into JSON
or form data, et cetera. Or when you're finally producing the response and taking either file
data, which is binary or string data and turning it into the bytes. That's the only place now where
it deals with bytes. Everywhere else is strings. And the boundary there is always UTF-8. And if
UTF-8 isn't your thing, we're not preventing you from using other things. It just means that when
you're at those boundaries, you can take the bytes directly and work with them. Surprisingly,
this was a huge, massive change and I have not gotten any bug reports about it.
Wow.
I was stressing so much about, okay, this is huge. We tested it first and made beta releases and
everything, but those go to almost no attempt. Talk Python to Me is partially supported by our
training courses. Do you want to learn Python, but you can't bear to subscribe to yet another service?
At Talk Python Training, we hate subscriptions too. That's why our course bundle gives you full
access to the entire library of courses for just one fair price. That's right. With the everything
bundle, you save over 80% off the full price of our courses and you own them all forever.
That includes the courses published at the time of purchase, as well as courses released within
about a year after the bundle. Stop subscribing and start learning at talkpython.fm/everything.
All right. I can't leave the house for the next week. Publish.
Yeah. No, like you joke, but like, seriously, when I hit the publish button or when I used to hit the
publish button, I would be like, I want to go for a walk now because I just did a ton of work and I
just want to clear my head. But oh God, then an hour from now when I get back, what is my inbox
going to look like? Yeah. Yeah. That's great. You know, you talk another part of your presentation
at FlaskCon was about project level stuff. And you also talked about the systemization type of
thing you're looking for. So one of the things you switched to is the trusted publishers. That's kind
of cool, right? Yeah. So I mentioned a little bit about like when we were talking about, sorry,
when we were talking about pinning requirements, I was saying, oh, you know, it makes it a lot
easier for every contributor to work on things at Sprint if every single environment is the same.
And so kind of on a meta level, there's a lot of like different tools and configurations and
workflows we use across projects, but they've kind of been developed over time as I've learned them.
And so I've been doing work on like a meta level. So every project now, if you go look at Flask
and Ferg, so again, Jinja and you clone all the repos, all the repos look exactly the same. They
all have the same files, the same directory layout, same tool configurations, et cetera.
Because just like it should be easy for every contributor to get the same environment,
it should be easy for anybody who's used to contributing to Flask to go over to VeriXoic
and be just as comfortable in that project. It's the Flask way and it all goes the same, right?
So yeah, like trusted publishing, that was another big part of this was like making workflows. So we
have a workflow for running tests, for example. But publishing used to be a very manual process
and it's evolved over the years too, because we were on Travis before and then we needed to make
like Windows builds for Markup Safe, which has wheels. So we were on AppVeyor also.
Then Travis went away and stuff and GitHub Actions became more. But that was all for tests.
Like for building, we basically, when we wanted to make a new release, it was way harder in the
past, which is why releases happened less often, because I would have to say like, "Okay, I'm ready.
Do all the little bookkeeping stuff to set the release version and the release date and
everything. Now I have to go get my Mac, get my Windows machine, get my Linux machine, make the
builds on all of them, then manually consolidate them, upload them manually to PyPI, et cetera,
and make sure that all worked." So what I have now is I have a standard publish workflow on every
single project. It works exactly the same way. And you make a PR so that you can see all the
tests run. You make a PR that just does that version bump and the date, says the release date.
You watch all the tests pass and then you push a tag before you merge. You push the release tag,
and that kicks off the build workflow. So we run our build. We do SLSA or Salsa out of station.
Say like these builds are associated with these commits in Git and were built by these workers.
It's kind of like a supply chain level thing. And then we automatically, it will collect all
that stuff, show you here's the release, like here's a draft release for this. Here are all
the, like you have one more opportunity to look at the files and then a maintainer can go in and
click publish in GitHub's UI. And that will kick off like, okay, maintainer said everything's good.
We're just going to upload it now. And that's all automated. We're using the trusted publishing
workflow between PyPI and GitHub. So I no longer have to have my password stored locally for PyPI
or have like tokens made for each project. All the authentication happens between GitHub and
PyPI automatically and securely. It's pretty cool. If you go look up like trusted publishing on
PyPI has like a blog or documentation that explains it. But it is really, really convenient.
And it makes like this whole workflow means that whenever I want to make a new release,
I just make a regular PR, push a tag and then see everything pass and say, yes, we're good.
So I just basically have to push three buttons now. It's a lot easier to just make more regular
releases, like even bug fix releases. I was always willing to make them fast because it was so much
work. Well, if it's a matter of just pushing, pushing a commit and then saying, okay,
you're way more likely to quickly ship fixes and ship smaller releases and all sorts of stuff.
It's really good. And you don't have the whole supply chain problem of your machine somehow
got hacked. But then now when you do your build, somebody's injected something gnarly into the
wheel, right? Because it never goes through you. It just goes from GitHub directly to PyPI through
GitHub actions, right? Yeah. And GitHub added their own. So the SLSA out of station that
I was talking about, if you scroll down on this screen, you can see that multiple.intodo.jsonl.
If you click on it, it's just a big blob of text, but that's basically describing here are these
wheel files, like those wheel files and S dist files. And here's like signatures and about like
the GitHub environment that built this and everything. GitHub itself is adding that similar
sort of out of station. And then PyPI is also adding more out of stations. It's not out yet
though, but I'm sure I will be testing it once they're starting it and they release it in beta.
So being able to attest that like our build environment was consistent with what the
artifacts you're seeing and like the upload along the way was secured and like it is gaining more,
like that's more gaining more attention nowadays and importance. Yeah, that's really-
Trying to keep up with it all. It's excellent. It also makes it easier to
hand it over to someone else and trust that they're doing it right. Not like something,
they only like wheel seven, so you got a weird wheel or something now.
Yeah. I mean, this, yeah, this line of silence like was such an impediment to finding other
maintainers because you had to teach like, I think I probably had some document that explained how to
do this build before, like all the steps I went through, but it was like, it was so complicated.
And like, yeah, if somebody else wanted to make a release, I would have to make sure they did
everything correctly. I had just gotten used to it. It was like rote for me, but it was a lot of
steps. Now it's just anybody does the same, you know, make a PR, push a button. Everything else
is done for them. Yeah. Yeah. That's awesome. All right. So the two takeaways that I got from
Veric'soic's update was this dropping of the two to three juggling made it 50% faster for request
response and URL lib is no longer URL lib-ish. Yeah. Yeah. So that was the other part of it.
If we're going back to Vericoic, so we removed the string bytes, testing all over the place.
And Vericoic, this was again, historically because of like Python two versus Python three
differences and then compatibility and stuff. But another of the changes in Python three was
URL lib. In Python two, there was like URL lib and URL lib two. And that's why there's also the
project URL lib three. But Python three kind of consolidated that back into URL lib with sub
packages instead. So it kind of changed the interfaces and where everything was. So at the
time it made sense for Vericoic to just copy that code into our own code base and then make
our own tweaks to it to be compatible with everything. But what that ended up meaning
was we had an entire copy of URL lib with our own tweaks in our code base. And then we weren't
keeping up with changes. So like CPython has like a hundred different core devs on it. I mean,
they're not all paying attention to URL lib, but they're making regular security updates or just
performance improvements and that sort of stuff. And we're not getting any of those benefits
because we now have like this vendored copy that we've changed ourselves. We couldn't even bring
in the changes. And just like the string bytes everywhere, having that our own copy of that
really complex low level code made it harder to reason about the code and maintain it. And all
this stuff is kind of like, it's not the essential parts of Vericoic. Vericoic is like trying to be
the WSGI utilities and stuff. It's not trying to be like every single possible, like it's not
trying to, we don't need to make our own URL lib utility and everything to be Vericoic. So that
was another big one where I identified like, okay, this is just a lot of complexity. I didn't
actually expect this to be a performance improvement, but when I actually went through
and removed URL lib and our own copy and replaced it with Python's version, we got like a 30% speed
up just on our own. So the combined of those two big changes was like about a 50% speed up in our
request response. It turns out that the Python's implementation of all this was just faster than
ours and it still does all the same things. Yeah. So now you don't have to mess with it.
You get it for free. Yeah, exactly. Like everyone else.
A lot of these changes, a lot of the changes in all the libraries are stuff where I've been,
like I said, I wasn't the original author of this stuff. So I've had to learn the code bases. I've
had to dig into them and say like, what is written here? Why is it written this way? How is it all
related? And along the way, I just keep identifying like, okay, this is the actual purpose of this
library. Does this fit into that purpose or can we be doing something different? And so kind of
trying to like slim down the libraries and like focus, tighten up the focus on their purposes more.
Right. If there's parts that are, it needs to work, but it's not its purpose, maybe that can
come from somewhere else. Yeah. Yeah. All right. Yeah, absolutely. We've got about 10 more minutes
tops probably. So what else do we want to cover to give us the stage?
I'll mention Jinja and Click really briefly because these two libraries are also huge. They're used
everywhere. Downloaded a ton. Jinja is a templating library. You write template files and then you can
render them with variables to produce output. HTML, but also like text files or all sorts of stuff.
Yeah. I think people pigeonhole Jinja2 much. They think, okay, well I'm generating dynamic
HTML from a server request. Like you can use Jinja to generate all sorts of files. I use it on
stuff basically on Python generate like emails. Somebody wants to reset their password, right?
Like I'll generate an email body from it, for example. Right. That kind of stuff.
Yeah. And then Click is a, just like Flask is a framework for web applications, Click is a
framework for command line applications. And both of these libraries have gotten a lot of attention
from me, but they are not at inbox zero. Unlike the other libraries, I have not managed to get
them down there because I was working with the other libraries. And so these are where I'm like
going to need to focus. Like I said, my current focus for the rest of this year is writing
maintainer documentation. So I'm trying to do less code and all of these libraries are stable.
Everybody downloads them. Like ton of people download them. They all work. We can make them
better and everything, but they're not in like, it's not like they're immediate danger or need of
anything. But I do want to like clear out the backlogs of those as well. And looking for more
contributors for that help with that. You said you're looking for contributors who are really
psyched about typing and also for... Oh God, if anybody is, if anybody knows,
like is an expert in typing and like type annotations and static type tools, all the
libraries do pass mypy strict tests and export. Like we do do some testing against pyright to
some degree, but I'm just typing just, it's very hard for me to understand. Like it's a very
complicated subject on its own versus all the other stuff I have to be doing. So I really would
like somebody who's like, I am an expert at typing. I'm going to like start fixing up what you're,
cause I like had to, I had to learn typing as I was like adding it to these libraries.
Yeah.
Yeah. That's a big thing that we can improve. And yeah, you know, there's like, we've gotten a lot
of attention, a lot of the stuff in Click and Jinja also, we have PRs for a lot of stuff. It's just a
matter of me having the time to go through and review all of them to cut down that backlog,
but we're getting there. I'll get there eventually.
Yeah. Beautiful.
And then the last, so the last thing I want to mention, or we ran out of time completely is
besides Palettes, the core projects itself. I've kind of mentioned this theme of trying to make
the projects more maintainable and grow the community and the team. And part of that that
I've started identifying is the greater ecosystem around these projects. So Flask is great to use on
its own, but it's made even better by all the extensions out there that people have written,
you know, for doing email, doing database stuff, authentication, all sorts of things.
And just like Flask itself, you know, and all those libraries, there was a long period where
they weren't getting as maintained, you know, as much attention and stuff. And then I started
stepping in. A lot of those extensions were written quite a long time ago now, and the
maintainers of those have kind of moved on to different things. And so there's a lot of stuff
in the ecosystem that isn't getting as much attention as it needs. And a lot of the times,
maintainers are aware of this and they're willing to like, say, like to take help,
you know, to get help with those things. And so I was really inspired by a project for Django
extensions called Jazz Band. Oh, yeah. We're basically they're an organization that says,
are you a popular Django extension or pip or pip tools? For some reason, they also control pip
tools. But do you not have time to be the maintainer of it anymore? Come over to Jazz
Band. You'll still be like, you can still be involved in the project, but we'll also help you
find more people from the community. Like we will open up the maintaining process to your interested
users in the community. And so I'm doing a similar thing with palettes called palettes eco
for ecosystem. Okay. So if you go to github.com/palettes-eco. Yeah, palettes-eco.
GitHub. What we've started to do is reach out to maintainers of like, Flask SQLAlchemy, Flask
admin, Flask security, Flask mail, Blinker, caching, debug toolbar, like all these huge
extensions. So many of them have these huge backlogs, just like Flask and all the other
projects did when I got started with them, you know, and their maintainers are overwhelmed.
And so I reach out to them. I've been reaching out to them and kind of explaining, hey, we're
starting this thing up. Do you want to add your project? So we've had some successful already.
We've had people at sprints contribute to them. And like I was talking about, I've kind of
standardized how Flask and the other projects look like all the tools they're using, the layouts
they're using, the workflows they're using. I'm taking that same approach and trying to
standardize all the extensions we get to. So the idea is that anybody who's used to contributing
to one of these extensions, it should be just as familiar to them to jump into another extension
and contribute there as well. Right. That's a great idea. Yeah. And so with Palettes Eco,
we can help find maintainers from the community, add them. But the core team for Palettes themselves
still has access as well. So, you know, if we make some change to Flask that finally
removes something that some like some internal thing that somebody was relying on, and like
suddenly this popular live extension no longer works, we at least have access. Like we're not,
we're probably not going to take on the responsibility of being the like core
maintainers of all these things, but we can step in and make an emergency release that just,
oh, you just need to change this line here, make a bug fix release really quick. So we can at least
keep the ecosystem going while we like work on finding longer term sustainability with more
maintainers. I love that idea because a lot of times it is a really small change, but if it
doesn't work, it doesn't work. Right. Right. Exactly. Like a lot of the times it's been like,
we have made like little deprecations and then reveals and stuff, which have just,
that was the one thing that some random extension was relying on that every, like half the ecosystem
ended up relying on. And we just had to like, you know, change a line or change an import or
add an argument. So yeah, like that's my big focus now. If people are interested in contributing
to palettes, they're welcome to, you know, contribute to like Jinja and Click or any of
the projects as well. If there's open issues, they can work on them, but like a huge new source of
like involvement for people can be, what are the extensions you're using? Let's get you involved
in those as well. Yeah. It makes a lot of sense because to make a change to Flask is, it's a
highly polished piece of software, but the extensions potentially are more open to just
jumping in and getting into it. Yeah. It's really, it's really hard for people. It's hard to tell
people this, but like, you know, people come in excited, like, oh, I want to contribute to Flask.
And then they look at it and they're like, oh, three open issues. What do I do? You know,
or like, and these three issues are like really low level stuff or like, they've already been
handled or something. Sure. And so we like, yeah, like what we're telling people now is like, okay,
well, Flask, not only is it made up of these five other libraries, but there's also this whole
extension ecosystem out there for you to contribute to. Like everybody's heard of Flask, you know,
so we can point them at the right place. They come to us and then we point them. Yeah. Excellent.
Well, I'll be sure to link to that in the show notes as well. Yeah. And with that, I think we're
out of time. Thank you for being here. Just final call to action. You know, people either want to
contribute or just want to use Flask. What do you tell them? Yeah. Yeah. So like I said, we're like
developing Alex Eco. I'm currently writing maintainer documentation, so it'll make it
easier for people to get involved in that way. I'm writing a new website with a lot of our policies
and everything. But the main point of contact for all of this and the way we coordinate with
our community is on our Discord server. So if you go to discord.gg/palettes, that will let you join
the palettes server. It's, you know, open to everybody. We need help, you know, not only
contributing to the libraries, but answering questions in our questions channel or, you know,
like triaging issues and all sorts of things. There's lots of different ways to be involved
in the projects without writing code. And it all starts on that Discord server. Awesome. Well,
thanks again for being here and catch you next time. Yeah. Thank you. Bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me. Thank you to our sponsors. Be sure to
check out what they're offering. It really helps support the show. Take some stress out of your
life. Get notified immediately about errors and performance issues in your web or mobile
applications with Sentry. Just visit talkpython.fm/sentry and get started for free.
Be sure to use the promo code Talk Python all onward. We have one of the largest catalogs of
Python video courses over at Talk Python. Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply
advanced topics like memory and async. And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm. Be sure to subscribe to the show. Open your
favorite podcast app and search for Python. We should be right at the top. You can also find
the iTunes feed at /iTunes, the Google Play feed at /play, and the Direct RSS feed at /rss on
talkpython.fm. We're live streaming most of our recordings these days. If you want to be part of
the show and have your comments featured on the air, be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel
at talkpython.fm/youtube. This is your host, Michael Kennedy. Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it. Now get out there and write some Python code.